---
layout: post
title: "Recipes for a Work Culture that Work."
description: "Ideas to foster a kickass organizational culture in any start-up."
tags: ['culture',’ownership’,’organization’,’employee empowerment’,’client satisfaction’,’insights’]
author: sanat
---
{% include JB/setup %}
We love talking recipes at CodeIgnition. Not just the automation scripts variety (I’m looking at you Chef), but also the office lunch or the myriad of things found in our pantry. So when it came to writing something that takes stock of what makes us who we are & who we want to be, I could think of no better way than to break the formula in its parts, or recipes.

These are ideas & insights that have worked, and continue to work for us as we scale up. These are our (not so) secret recipes for building an effective start-up culture.

**Recipe 0: The Cuisine**

Start by knowing what you are going to serve. Have an idea for the type of place You would love to work in, and make that your goal. When we started CodeIgnition we knew we wanted to create a community, not just a company. And we have steered in that direction.

**Recipe 1: Multiply Slow & Steady**

Be measured & meticulous when considering people to join your team. Get to know them a bit more and give them a chance to get to know you too. Rushing to hire can be like using ingredients without reading the labels; it comes to nothing & adds more time in the long run.

**Recipe 2: Be Flat, Stand Tall**

Have a flat organizational hierarchy, and know full well that it doesn’t just mean less protocols & team fragmentation. It means a level-playing field where individuals are empowered with a voice and can use it for the collective good. Less friction, more fruition.

**Recipe 3: Too Many Cooks..**

..Don’t always spoilt the broth. Having a culture of collective ownership means each failure (like each victory) affects everyone. And when you feel as a unit, you work as one. Whether it’s through challenging or helping each other, at CodeIgnition we have noticed the next outcome is always the same – victory.

**Recipe 4: Boundaries Over Rules**

You have hired the right people & empowered them. Now a little patience please. Set boundaries, rather than rules that range from the rigid & unaccommodating to the plain inane. At CodeIgnition we have simple but effective boundaries, like dressing for comfort & decency rather than having a dress code, or having flexible & core working hours rather than key-cards & shift. These things add up to job satisfaction, and ultimately..

**Recipe 5: ..Satisfaction Matters**

Happy team members mean happy clients. And as a service provider, satisfying clients rather than just billing them is a true measure of success. Encourage client satisfaction as a goal, as in the end it is a victory for everyone (refer Recipe 3).

**Recipe 6: Give Back**

Raise the standards a bit, and convert some otherwise privileges into rights. Be it gizmos, utilities, leaves, conference expenses or even s.w.a.g (stuff we all get). Make it the best, make it for everyone & make working together the only privilege.

**Recipe 7: Mingle & Go Out**

Planned or impulsive, do other things together. Board or video games, team sports, night-outs et al. We do pretty much every fun & entertaining thing we can do together. And we work between them.

**Recipe 8: Aware, Not Afraid**

Keep an eye on things, take stock. And if you’ve made mistakes, know that everyone does. If a recipe isn’t working out as expected, don’t be afraid to tweak, adapt or change. 

**Recipe 9: Share**

If you’ve taken stock and like what you see, share your secret recipes with the world. Maybe in a blogpost. And remember to advise mixing & matching as needed.


